<html>
<head>
<title>
How to Be a Leader in Your Field
</title>
</head>
<body>
<h3>
How to Be a Leader in Your Field: <br>
A Guide for Students in Professional Schools <p>
</h3>

<h4>
Philip E. Agre <br>
Department of Information Studies <br>
University of California, Los Angeles <br>
Los Angeles, California  90095-1520 <br>
USA <p>

pagre@ucla.edu <br>
<A HREF = http://polaris.gseis.ucla.edu/pagre/>http://polaris.gseis.ucla.edu/pagre/</A> <p>

Version of 7 October 2005. <br>
4600 words. <p>

</h4>

&nbsp; <p>

A profession is more than a job -- it is a community and a culture.
Professions serve society by pooling knowledge among their members
and creating incentives to synthesize new knowledge.  They also
help their members to build networks, find jobs, recruit staff,
find collaborators, and organize around the issues that affect them.
In a world without change or innovation, professions would not be
so necessary.  But in a world where change and innovation are ever
more intense, every occupation needs more of the institutions and
culture of traditional professions such as law, medicine, engineering,
education, librarianship, public administration, business, and
architecture. <p>

Every profession has leaders.  In a formal sense, the elected officers
of a professional society are the leaders of that profession.  Because
a profession is fundamentally about knowledge, however, the true
leaders of a profession are the thought leaders: the individuals who
synthesize the thinking of the profession's members and articulate
directions for the future.  Sometimes a profession will elect its
thought leaders to official positions.  But often the thought leaders
prefer to lead through writing and speaking, cutting-edge projects,
conference organizing, and dialogue.  Leadership means both talking
and listening, both vision and consensus.  A leader builds a web of
relationships within the profession and articulates the themes that
are emerging in the thinking of the profession as a whole. <p>

In a knowledge-intensive world of ceaseless innovation and change,
I assert, every professional must be a leader.  This is not a
universally popular idea.  Some people say, "leadership is fine
for others, but I just want a job".  I want to argue that it doesn't
work that way.  The skills that the leader exercises in building a
critical mass of opinion around emerging issues are the same skills
that every professional needs to stay employed at all.  In the old
days the leadership-averse could hide out in bureaucracies.  But as
institutions are turned inside out by technology, globalization, and
rising public and client expectations of every sort, the refuges are
disappearing.  Every professional's job is now the front lines, and
the skills of leadership must become central to everyone's conception
of themselves as a professional. <p>

But how?  It is well-known that simply declaring yourself a leader
will not cause anyone to follow you.  The process of becoming a leader
doesn't happen overnight, but it is perfectly methodical.  Here is
a six-step recipe.  Things aren't really this rigid in practice, but
you'll have no trouble varying the recipe once you get used to it. <p>

(1) Pick an issue.  You need an issue that the profession as a whole
is not really thinking about, but which is going to be the center
of attention in five years.  The issue could be technical, strategic,
managerial, policy-related, or all of the above.  It could be a
problem or an opportunity or both.  It could be a new method or a
whole new area of practice.  It should be fairly specific, though, and
should directly address the day-to-day work of people in some segment
of the profession.  The word "technology", for example, is too big to
be a workable issue.  You can find an issue in several ways: <p>

<blockquote>

  (a) Talk to dynamic practitioners and notice a pattern in what they
are saying. <p>

  (b) Talk to people at your school.  One purpose of a professional
school is to be the early-warning system for the profession -- the
surveillance center where emerging issues are articulated, researched,
and taught.  Many issues that you take for granted as lecture and
paper topics in your classes actually represent the farthest horizon
so far as most practitioners are concerned.  Who to talk to?  Start
with the people who are excited.  They are excited because they have
located a high-quality opportunity to do well by doing good. <p>

  (c) Talk to people in other professions to find issues that are
going to be important for your profession.  This could mean simply
asking them what issues are important right now, or it could mean
explaining the situation in your profession to them in detail and
asking them to instruct you.  For example, the people who first
applied ideas from statistics to computer science became leaders,
as did the people who first applied economic analysis to law.
Alternatively, identify distinctive intellectual resources that
you already bring with you, or that you are highly motivated to
learn, and that people aren't really applying in your profession
yet.  Ransack your field to identify issues that you can transform
by thinking about them in that way. <p>

  (d) Pick a topic within your profession that you would really hope
to be working on someday, and read books and articles about that topic
from a variety of other fields, professional and nonprofessional,
even if they use different language for it.  Be weirded out by the
completely different coordinate systems that different fields use.
Shake yourself loose from the accreted layers of presuppositions
and assumptions that your profession has built up around the topic.
Then set an agenda for reinventing that topic using language that
people in your profession can understand. <p>

  (e) Redescribe one of your profession's existing functions in an
abstract way, and then identify several other activities to which
the same abstraction could be applied -- including activities that
are currently performed by other professions.  For example, library
cataloguers are really specialists in "metadata services", and many
other professions (e.g., publishing) are doing a bad job of things
because they lack a serious professional understanding of metadata.
<p>

  (f) Talk to the people who use your profession's products and
services.  And talk especially to the ones who are leaders in their
own field, so that their situation helps you to predict the future of
that field in general.  How are their needs changing?  What new needs
will they have in five years?  What are their values and long-term
goals?  What would it be like for your profession to be dramatically
more useful to them?  Is your profession really gearing up to maintain
and expand its relevance?  Now talk to them again.  This time, tell
them some of the surprising new ways in which your profession might
be able to help them in the future, and invite them to think with you
about how their own field might be improved as a result. <p>

  (g) Learn the arguments that your field's current leaders employ
at budget time.  Then devise some new arguments that the people with
the money will understand.  Use these arguments to start conversations
with knowledgeable colleagues about what arguments the relevant people
can in fact understand.  Try to identify elements of their thinking
that you hadn't previously known about.  Then convert what is valid in
their thinking into issues for the field.  Once you stop thinking of
the money people as opaque authorities, you will more readily notice
opportunities to expand your profession. <p>

  (h) Assemble a group of ten other change-minded students in your
school and spend two hours brainstorming at least a hundred new ways
that your profession could provide people with useful products and
services.  Assume the technology of ten years from now.  All of your
ideas should be clear departures from past practice.  Doing this in a
group is useful because everyone's surprising ideas can help everyone
else to think in original directions.  Then whittle down your list to
the few that are both radical and plausible. <p>

  (i) Draw on your own experience, values, and intellect to articulate
an issue that nobody else is talking about.  Maybe you are simply
anticipating concerns that everybody else will be discovering
independently in a few years, or maybe you are building something new
that wouldn't have happened without you.  In either case, if the issue
is going to be important to your profession in five years, you'll be
doing a public service by getting out in front of it. <p>

  (j) Cultivate your powers of being interested in things.  Every time
you succeed in becoming interested in something new, do three things:
Google it, type it into the article indexes for your profession at
the library Web site and read a few articles about it, and then have
a conversation with someone who knows about it.  A good way to convene
such a conversation is, "I'd like you ask your advice".  Do this
for a year.  Note that you are now interested in several important
things that nobody else is thinking about.  Assume that others in your
generation will find them interesting once you explain them. <p>

  (k) Looking at your profession as it stands today, and perhaps by
talking to some of its newer and more iconoclastic members, identify
an aspect of current practice that is archaic.  Pose the question of
what the ideal reform would be. <p>

  (l) Write down all the difficulties that seem to recur in your
experience of practicing your profession -- anything, however small,
that often seems to go wrong.  Or else become an anthropologist for
a day, and hang out with some people -- students, immigrants, new
customers, etc -- who are dealing with your profession for the first
time.  Experience consternation at the difficulties they run into.
Collect a dozen difficulties.  Then start making theories of what
causes those difficulties.  Big, pretentious theories are best,
especially if they exaggerate how important the difficulties you've
listed really are.  Elaborate your theories in your notebook for
a few more months until they are really grandiose.  Then use the
theories to start generating ideas for innovation and change in your
profession.  Many of your ideas will have advantages aside from fixing
the difficulty that inspired them.  Consult with dynamic people to
determine which of these ideas (not the theories, obviously, but the
ideas) might be plausible as issues for the long haul. <p>

  (m) Ask yourself, what is the big fashion in my profession right
now, or in my specific area?  Fashions usually edit reality, leaving
out important issues that will come roaring back sooner or later.
Don't be a reactionary by trying to roll back the current fashion
to something that came before.  Instead, identify those elements of
the current fashion that are valuable, and articulate an agenda that
remixes those elements with the elements that are being left out. <p>

  (n) Learn about a new family of technologies that will have great
consequences for practice in your field once it becomes widely
available.  By a "family" I mean a broad category of technologies such
as nanotechnology or grid computing around which new institutions of
research and application are forming, rather than a single invention
that may or may not build a critical mass of acceptance.  In general,
build yourself an intelligence system for learning what new research
is in the pipeline, so that you can formulate the issues that will
become important once the new methods become practical.  If you're
not interested in technologies, then try government policies instead.
Government policies have an immense and generally non-obvious impact
on society, thus creating opportunities for people who are aware
of them.  Keep yourself apprised, therefore, of the pipeline of
new policies that fall even remotely within your field of competence,
including seemingly small and obscure ones whose significance no one
else recognizes, and identify the ones whose impacts are going to be
issues for your field. <p>

  (o) Look at the history of your profession, identify a force that
has been operating continuously to change how the profession works,
and imagine what will happen as that force becomes even stronger
in the future.  A trend that senior practitioners have observed in
the course of their careers, for example, usually reflects a force
that can be expected to intensify.  If the force is positive, spell
out its consequences and the practical agenda they entail.  If it
is negative, issue a call to arms and define a viable alternative.
If it is complicated, begin sorting the good from the bad. <p>

  (p) Look at the way that work in your profession is evolving, and
see if a new "class" is emerging.  This might happen, for example,
if a new division of labor is creating a group of workers who have
common interests that differ from the interests of people who are
doing other parts of the work.  If the new group hasn't yet developed
a collective identity and collective institutions, then you can help
by articulating the issues that affect them. <p>

  (q) Look at the different sorts of people who are entering
the profession in contrast to twenty years ago.  What interests,
values, and concerns distinguish them from older generations?  If
you discover that senior and junior members of the profession regard
quite different issues as important, and if the junior professionals'
issues have not been properly studied, help articulate the agenda
for the rising generation. <p>

  (r) Identify an issue that has arisen somewhat independently in
different organizations or different countries, but where the relevant
practitioners haven't yet formed themselves into a network, much less
an interest group.  More generally, discover two or more groups that
ought to know one another but don't, and identify an issue around
which the groups ought to be comparing notes. <p>

  (s) Identify an intellectual or political trend in the broader
society that you generally agree with, and ask what its implications
would be in the practice of your profession. <p>

  (t) Identify something that people in your field currently do in a
haphazard way, perhaps because it is new.  Put an impressive name on
it, so that people interpret every example of it as particular species
of some genus.  Interview the people who are doing it, and make a list
of issues that pools together everything they are thinking about when
they do it.  The result will be a theory that helps them to do it in
a rational way.  If your theory can be summarized in terms of a new
idea, all the better. <p>

  (u) Work for a dynamic innovator -- that is, not someone who is
famous for having dynamically innovated twenty years ago, but someone
who is dynamically innovating right now.  Learn how it is done.
Then go out on your own.  Suitable issues are really quite plentiful,
and new ones will be easy to come up with once you once you start to
understand the world in the way a dynamic innovator does. <p>

  (v) Collect people in your profession who have novel ideas.  Combine
their ideas with your own in novel ways. <p>

  (w) Analyze the processes by which people in your profession learn
new things and use them to do their work better.  Are these processes
rational?  What would better processes be like? <p>

  (x) Identify five important trends in the world in general, e.g.,
"China is becoming integrated with other countries" or "computers
will be a thousand times more powerful within twenty years".
What opportunities and challenges do these trends create for your
profession? <p>

  (y) Ask yourself, what is the real purpose of my profession, or
my particular subfield?  What would be a completely different way to
achieve that purpose?  Brainstorm a list of twenty ways in which work
in your profession can be changed to connect it more directly with its
real purpose. <p>

  (z) Having done many of the exercises listed above, try to
characterize your personal thinking style -- or, more precisely, your
issue-discovering style.  For example, you might discover best when
immersed in a crowd of challenging people, or by trawling through
large amounts of raw information, or by drawing diagrams.  Then invent
some methods that really amplify what works for you.

</blockquote>

You will probably want to apply several of these methods, working
back and forth between them until you have a clear picture of the
issues that are emerging.  Whenever you can articulate a candidate
issue, ask people what counterarguments a tough audience would raise,
then use them creatively to make your issue even better.  Once you
finally settle on an issue, put yourself in charge of raising the
profession's awareness of it.  If putting yourself in charge feels
arrogant, that's just because you're not used to it.  Focus on the
issue and you'll be fine. <p>

(2) Having chosen your issue, start a project to study it.  You might
do this in the context of a term paper or an independent study, or you
might organize it through the local student chapter of a professional
association.  Or you might simply do it on your own time.  It's hard
work, yes, but it's an investment.  See if a local faculty member will
sign on as an advisor to the project, and if you can use the faculty
member's name in talking to people. <p>

(3) Find relevant people and talk to them.  First do your library
work so you know any conventional wisdom that's out there.  Then talk
to some working professionals who are facing the issue, especially
if they have spoken publicly about an aspect of it.  You can find
these people by asking the faculty in your school; it's their job to
know everyone.  If the faculty are reticent at first to unleash you
on their contacts, then work your own contacts, for example through
your fellow students or the professional society.  You can also
find relevant people by reading professional publications, attending
conferences, and searching Web sites.  Tell the people you seek
out that your project is pulling together the profession's experience
with the issue, and ask if you can interview them.  Have a good,
focused talk, make serious notes, ask if they want to keep anything
confidential, give them your card, and promise to keep in touch.
Why are they willing to talk to you?  Because you're working on an
important issue, and because you're associated with a professional
school, which is a center of thinking and networking for the field.
Use the symbolic power of the university while you're still associated
with it. <p>

(4) Pull together what you've heard.  Nobody is expecting you to
solve the problems.  Real working professionals do have to solve
problems, of course, but right now the emphasis is more on questions
than answers.  You will contribute simply by defining the whole scope
of the problems that people are facing.  Make a taxonomy and give
examples.  Talk about what people are doing to address the problems.
Focus on practice: the actual decisions that working professionals
will have to make, and the full range of considerations they will
have to take into account.  Most of these considerations will seem
obvious taken in isolation, but many people will be grateful to have
a complete list in front of them.  Remember that professionals, no
matter how creative and intuitive they are, have to justify their
decisions in a rational way, giving reasons why they have made
one choice rather than another.  You'll do a service just by laying
out the choices and reasons.  Talk about the consequences people see
for the future.  Just impose some order.  Faculty in your school can
probably help you with this.  Write clearly and concisely, and get
someone who can write well to copyedit your work. <p>

(5) Circulate the result.  Send copies to the people who helped you.
Call it a draft or interim report if you want.  Give credit to the
people whose ideas you've written down.  Then follow up.  Get further
comments.  Now write some short columns for professional publications.
Describe your project and summarize the issue.  Explain why the issue
is becoming important.  Concisely present the dangers and opportunities
for the profession.  Your goal is to lead: to present the profession
with a valid issue that calls for action.  Again, you don't need to
specify what the right action is.  You only need to give form to the
issue.  Make sure your published columns provide a permanent e-mail
address where people can reach you, and ideally the URL for a Web page
where you've collected materials related to the issue. <p>

(6) Build on your work.  Get invited to speak at meetings.  Correspond
with people who have contacted you after reading your work.  Meet
more people who appreciate the significance of the issue.  If you
hear about someone who is working on a similar issue, make friends.
Show them that you've read their work, give them due credit, and
explore how your projects complement one another.  Expand your
network to include your profession's clients and peers.  As you take
in everyone's perspectives, let your understanding of the issue grow
and evolve.  Come up with many honest ways of explaining the issue and
clear answers to the standard questions you get asked.  Don't try to
convert people who don't get it.  You may be a voice in the wilderness
for a while, but keep building networks and synthesizing ideas.
Your energetic and responsible approach will make you a magnet for
intelligent people.  As interest in the issue accelerates, build
institutions around it.  See if the people in your network want to
start a moderated mailing list.  Organize a panel discussion about
it at a professional meeting.  And so on.  Keep going until the issue
either matures or disappears.  Then find another issue and start over.
<p>

That's the procedure.  You should always have at least one issue that
you are developing in this way.  In doing so, you are helping the
profession to think out loud about its problems and potentials, and
you are also helping to knit the profession together by establishing
connections among the people who are thinking about the issues on the
horizon.  You are also making yourself a strong job candidate.  You
are building knowledge, and you are building networks.  One purpose
of a professional school is to build such networks, and by helping you
the school helps itself. <p>

If you've spent your whole life going to school and toiling at normal
jobs, then you might find the prospect of leadership nerve-wracking.
Most schools and jobs are afraid of you, so they encourage a dependent
attitude where you wait around for other people to give you things.
Of course they don't entirely succeed; no institution can completely
extinguish your human agency.  Even so, few schools or jobs actively
train their inmates to take the initiative by organizing people around
emerging issues.  Yet successful people have exercised leadership
in this way for all of recorded history.  The methods of leadership
that I have described are not widely publicized, and many courses
that supposedly teach leadership skills omit them entirely.  But they
are out there, roaring at full throttle just below the surface, and
you can learn them by watching any successful person in action.  I'm
just hoping that by reading this you'll learn them a little faster.
<p>

As you advance in your profession, you will be organizing people in
more sophisticated ways around more sophisticated issues.  As such,
it will be important to cultivate your intellectual life.  Leadership
is such a rare skill that it doesn't matter whether you are a genius
in your own right.  Leadership is process, and the whole point is
that you're not figuring out all the answers yourself.  Accordingly,
you will need to build a brain trust -- smart and knowledgeable
people that you can turn to when you need expert judgements.  This
is one reason to stay in touch with the faculty at your school, and
with the smart people who pass through the school while you are there.
Another good way to start a brain trust is to organize a speaker series.
Fearlessly assess your intellectual strengths and weaknesses, and then
make professional friends whose intellectual strengths complement your
own.  Your contribution is to facilitate a large-scale movement within
the profession. <p>

As you become a leader, you will also face ethical issues.  Leadership
has a bad name; people associate it with dishonesty, manipulation,
and "politics".  That's because so many "leaders" prefer to surf
on issues, extracting the social energy around them for their own
benefit, rather than being a positive and constructive force in the
community.  Once you've built a network and evolved some rhetoric,
you can get away with a lot of selfishness.  People will probably
even praise you for it.  You can settle down to a life of mutual
back-scratching with your similarly-networked cronies, going through
the motions and never giving a serious thought to the community again.
But that's no good.  Your job is to model positive leadership.  You
have no doubt heard it explained that true leadership is "selfless".
I haven't emphasized that theme so far, for the simple reason that
it's useless to demand that people be selfless leaders until they
understand the six-step process that makes them leaders at all.  Now
that you do understand the process, and especially once you become
accustomed to actually doing it, it's time to put some content into
it.  Use your connections to help people who deserve help.  Promote
all ideas that you find valuable, whether they reinforce your issues
or not.  Keep trying to understand your issues more deeply, and ask
yourself whether the world is changing to make other issues more
important.  Don't be an ego freak.  And write down what you learn
along the way. <p>

Why do I argue that the modern world requires all professionals
to engage in leadership?  Before the Internet, professionals had
to be generalists.  Problems would arise, and you had to solve them.
Now, however, the institutions and infrastructures of your profession
easily bring professional knowledge to bear wherever it is needed.
To succeed in your career, you need more than the skills that you got
in school -- you need to be the world expert in something.  Knowledge
is global, it's growing exponentially, and nobody can pack all of
the necessary knowledge into their head.  So everyone's going to
specialize.  Specialization doesn't mean narrowness: it means reaching
out in many directions, talking to many kinds of people, and knitting
together the elements that make your issue matter.  "Leadership" used
to mean something unique: the army had one leader and everyone else
followed.  Today, however, knowledge is multiplying so fast that we
need more leaders than we can possibly produce.  Every leader can
feel important, and genuinely be important, and everyone is a leader,
including you. <p>

&nbsp; <p>

Here are some books and articles that might be useful. <p>

<i>Networking on the Network</i>.  This is a much longer article that
I wrote about professional networking for students in PhD programs.
Although most of the detailed instructions are specific to the
research world, the underlying philosophy will carry over into the
professional world.  On the Web at &lt;<a href =
http://dlis.gseis.ucla.edu/people/pagre/network.html>http://dlis.gseis.ucla.edu/people/pagre/network.html</a>&gt;.
<p>

Wayne E. Baker, <i>Networking Smart: How to Build Relationships for
Personal and Organizational Success</i>, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1994.
A fairly comprehensive book on the networking process, with greater
emphasis than most on strategy. <p>

Peter Block, <i>Flawless Consulting: A Guide to Getting Your Expertise
Used</i>, Austin: Learning Concepts, 1981.  Though written for
management consultants, this book has valuable things to say about the
feelings that come up in any kind of professional work, and how to use
them honestly for everyone's benefit. <p>

Thomas H. Davenport and Laurence Prusak, <i>What's the Big Idea?
Creating and Capitalizing on the Best Management Thinking</i>, Boston:
Harvard Business School Press, 2003.  This is a book about how to go
shopping, so to speak, among the ideas that are available in the works
of management professors and consultants -- understanding the nature
and dynamics of the ideas and choosing the ones that work best for
your organization and career. <p>

Donna Fisher and Sandy Vilas, <i>Power Networking</i>, Austin:
Mountain Harbour, 1992.  This is the best all-around book on the
subject of professional neworking.  It abstracts a long list of
guidelines that apply pretty widely across professions. <p>

Roger Fisher and William Ury, <i>Getting to Yes: Negotating Agreement
Without Giving In</i>, Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1981.  This is the
classic book on negotiating.  Its core message is that you should
negotiate on the basis of interests and not on positions, so that
negotiation becomes cooperative problem-solving.  If you lead then
you'll need these skills. <p>

Ford Harding, <i>Rain Making: The Professional's Guide to Attracting
New Clients</i>, Holbrook, MA: Bob Adams, 1994.  The way to get ahead
is to do something new and tell everyone about it.  This is a pretty
good introduction to the process, with a focus on publishing an
article and developing professional networks. <p>

Linda A. Hill, <i>Becoming a Manager: Mastery of a New Identity</i>,
Boston: Harvard Business School, 1992.  As a professional you'll
have probably a manager, and soon enough you'll probably be a manager
yourself.  Your job is to deal with these relationships in a mutually
beneficial way while also maximizing your own autonomy.  This is a
study of new managers getting used to their jobs, and it's a good
source of insight into these issues. <p>

Robert Jackall, <i>Moral Mazes: The World of Corporate Managers</i>,
New York: Oxford University Press, 1988.  This is a terrific book
about the ethical issues that will surround you in the organizational
world.  Once you understand these issues, you will see trouble coming
much further off, while you can still make your own decisions about
it. <p>

Tom Jackson, <i>Guerrilla Tactics in the New Job Market</i>, second
edition, New York: Bantam, 1991.  This is an excellent book about
finding a job; though it is out of print, you can probably find a used
copy online.  Sending dozens of resumes to personnel departments is
one approach, but a much better approach is systematic networking and
inside research. <p>

W. Chan Kim and Renee Mauborgne, <i>Blue Ocean Strategy: How to Create
Uncontested Market Space and Make the Competition Irrelevant</i>,
Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 2005.  This is a business book
that describes several methods for inventing entirely new products and
services. <p>

Michael Watkins, <i>The First 90 Days: Critical Success Strategies for
New Leaders at All Levels</i>, Boston: Harvard Business School Press,
2003.  This is a good basic outline of the first things to do when
you have been promoted to any sort of managerial job, and most of it
applies to any job at all. <p>

&nbsp; <p>

<a href = copyright.html>Copyright 2005 by Phil Agre.</a>

</body>
</html>
